Add Scala 3.6.2 announcement (#1699)
scala/scala-lang: _posts/2024-11-19-release-notes-3.6.0.md

---
category: announcement
permalink: /news/3.6.0
title: "Scala 3.6.0 is now available!"
---

<!-- TODO: Headline image -->

We're happy to announce the next minor release of Scala - 3.6.0 is finally out!

# What’s new in 3.6.0?

Besides multiple bugfixes, this release stabilises multiple experimental features introduced to Scala language after careful review and acceptance by the [Scala Improvement Proposal's Commitee](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/). Many of these changes can have a significant impact on the Scala syntax and are introducing new amazing possibilities in writing concise, typesafe as well as easier, and easier to maintain code.

> ## SIP-47 - Clause Interleaving

Author: @sjrd Can I ask you for a technical review or some improvements, as you're one of the SIP authors

The first major feature we're going to cover is the [clause interleaving](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/clause-interleaving.html).
With this change to the language, you're able to define multiple type parameter lists or place them after the first arguments list. Clause interleaving would benefit the path-dependent API creators.
It would eliminate the need for intermediate representations introducing runtime overhead or usage of complicated polymorphic functions.

```scala
trait Key { type Value }
trait DB {
  def getOrElse(k: Key)[V >: k.Value](default: V): V // dependent type parameter
}
```

> ## SIP-58 - Named Tuples

Author: @odersky  Can I ask you for a technical review or some improvements, as you're the author of these changes?

Another stabilized feature in this release are the Named Tuples. These have been introduced as experimental in Scala 3.5.0 and allowed you to give meaningful names to tuple elements and use those names during constructing, destructuring, and pattern matching.

```scala

>   type Point = (x: Int, y: Int)

Reviewer: There was some debate whether or not we should encourage type aliases to explicit named tuples as good style - one non-controversial example is multiple return values - such as the `partition` method on iterable, as it can now document in the signature which side is matching, and which side is rejections

Author: I've adapted the example so that we won't use type aliases and added the part when we use descriptive partionBy extension

Reviewer: awesome :)

  val point: Point = (x = 1, y = 2)
  point match
    case (x = real, y = 0) => println(s"Real number: $real")
    case _ => println("Point doesn't represent a real number")
```

This change also introduces improvements to extractors of case classes. You can now define named extractors for a selection of fields, allowing you to unclutter your code from unused variables.

```scala
case class User(id: Int, name: String, surname: String)

extension (values: Seq[User])
  //  Collect user IDs of every entry that has the name matching argument
  def idsWithName(name: String) = values.collect:
    case User(name = `name`, id = userId) => userId

> ```

Reviewer: I think it would be pretty critical to point out that named tuples now let you compute structural types without needing macros:

https://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/reference/other-new-features/named-tuples.html#computed-field-names-1

which is pretty cool for a lot of usecases - such as query DSL or typed data frames

Reviewer: it opens up a new paradigm for metaprogramming

Author: I've added a section about this part

> ## SIP-62 - For-Comprehension Improvements

Author: @KacperFKorban  Can I ask you for a technical review or some improvements, as you're author of these changes?

Starting with Scala 3.6.0 you can take advantage of improvements to the for-comprehesnions syntax.
Major user-facing improvement introduced by [SIP-62](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/better-fors.html) is ability to start for-comprehension block with aliases:

```scala

> for {

Reviewer: This still needs an experiemental import, was it meant to be stabilised?

```suggestion
import scala.language.experimental.betterFors

for {
```

Reviewer 2: Right, yes. Nice catch!

Author: Thank you for this catch. For some reason I though it was stable already. I'll mark it as experimental similarly to `runtimeChecked`

  a = 1
  b <- Some(2)
  c <- doSth(a)
} yield b + c
```

It also introduces changes to how your code is desugared by the compiler to `map` method calls, leading to a more optimized code by removing redundant calls where possible.

> ## SIP-64 - Improve Syntax for Context Bounds and Givens

Author: @odersky   Can I ask you for a technical review or some improvements, as you're the main author of these changes?

This release stabilises the [SIP-64](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/sips/typeclasses-syntax.html) introduced as experimental in Scala 3.5.0. These changes provide you with the new syntax for defining type class instances.
The goal of these changes is to simplify and narrow the syntax rules required to create a given instance. To name a few:

- you can now replace the `with` keyword with `:` when defining the simple type classes,
- context bounds can now be named and aggregated using `T : {A, B}` syntax,
- given methods defining requring contextual arguments can now be defined and chained using value
- conditional givens can also be defined with parameters
- by-name givens can be defined using conditional given with empty parameters list

```scala
trait Order[T]:

>   extension(values: Seq[T]) def toSorted: Seq[T] = ???

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  extension (values: Seq[T]) def toSorted: Seq[T] = ???
```

  def compare(x: T, y: T): Int

// No need for `with` keyword
given Order[Int]:
  def compare(x: Int, y: Int): Int = ???

// Named given using named context bound parameter
given listOrdering: [T: Order as elementOrder] => Order[List[T]]:
  def compare(x: List[T], y: List[T]): Int = elementOrder.compare(x.head, y.head)

trait Show[T]:

>   extension(value: T) def asString: String

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  extension (value: T) def asString: String
```

// Aggregated context parameters
def showOrdered[T: {Order as unusedName, Show}](values: Seq[T]): Unit =
  values.toSorted.map(_.asString).foreach(println)

// Conditional givens where a contextual instance of Config is required to create an instance of Factory
trait Config
trait Factory
class MemoizingFactory(config: Config) extends Factory
given (config: Config) => Factory = MemoizingFactory(config)

// By-name given
trait Context
given context: () => Context = ???
```

Other changes to type classes involve the stabilisation of context bounds for type members.
The next mechanism allows to definition of an abstract given instance that needs to be provided by the class implementing trait that defines abstract given.

```scala
trait Collection:
  // abstract member context-bound
  type Element: Order

class List[T: Order] extends Collection:
  type Element = T

>   // given Order[Element] = deferred // generated by compiler, uses class context bound

Reviewer: `given Order[Element] = deferred` is in the `Collection` trait
```suggestion
  // given Order[Element] = summon[Order[Element]] // generated by compiler, uses class context bound
```

class Set[T] extends Collection:
  type Element = T
  override given Order[Element] = ??? // custom implementation provided by the user
```

See the updated [Contextual Abstractions](https://scala-lang.org/api/3.6.0/docs/docs/reference/contextual/givens.html) chapter of the Scala 3 reference guide to learn more about these changes.

_**Note**: It is important not to confuse changes under SIP-64 with the [experimental modularity improvements](https://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/reference/experimental/typeclasses.html) available under `-language:experimental.modularity` and `-source:future`. These changes are still being developed in the experimental phase and would require SIP committee acceptance before stabilisation.

> ## SIP-56 Amendment: Match types extractors follow aliases and singletons

Author: @sjrd Can I ask you for a technical review or some improvements, as you're the one responsible for match type specification? Probably the improvement can be better explained

Reviewer 3: It's good.

---
category: announcement

> permalink: /news/3.6.0

Reviewer 4: I think We should rename `3.6.0` to `3.6.2` in all occurrences, and add a link to the publish accident?

The `Selectable` trait now has a `Fields` type member that can be instantiated to a named tuple.

```scala
class QueryResult[T](rawValues: Map[String, Any]) extends Selectable:
  type Fields = NamedTuple.Map[NamedTuple.From[T], Option]
  def selectDynamic(fieldName: String) = rawValues.get(fieldName)
  
case class City(zipCode: Int, name: String)

@main def Test =
  val query: QueryResult[City] = QueryResult(Map("name" -> "Lausanne"))
  assert(query.name.contains("Lausanne"))
  assert(query.zipCode.isEmpty)
```

You can read more about named tuples in the [dedicated section of Scala 3 reference documentation](https://scala-lang.org/api/3.6.0/docs/docs/reference/other-new-features/named-tuples.html).

## SIP-62 - For-Comprehension Improvements

Starting with Scala 3.6.0 you can take advantage of improvements to the for-comprehesnions syntax.
Major user-facing improvement introduced by [SIP-62](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/better-fors.html) is ability to start for-comprehension block with aliases:

```scala
for {
  a = 1
  b <- Some(2)
  c <- doSth(a)

>   extension (values: Seq[T]) def toSorted: Seq[T] = ???

Reviewer 3: This indentation can't be right, here. I don't know what the snippet is supposed to contain.

- conditional givens can also be defined with parameters
- by-name givens can be defined using conditional given with empty parameters list

```scala
trait Order[T]:
  extension (values: Seq[T]) def toSorted: Seq[T] = ???
  def compare(x: T, y: T): Int

// No need for `with` keyword
given Order[Int]:
  def compare(x: Int, y: Int): Int = ???

// Named given using named context bound parameter
given listOrdering: [T: Order as elementOrder] => Order[List[T]]:
  def compare(x: List[T], y: List[T]): Int = elementOrder.compare(x.head, y.head)

trait Show[T]:
  extension (value: T) def asString: String

// Aggregated context parameters
def showOrdered[T: {Order as unusedName, Show}](values: Seq[T]): Unit =
  values.toSorted.map(_.asString).foreach(println)

// Conditional givens where a contextual instance of Config is required to create an instance of Factory
trait Config
trait Factory
class MemoizingFactory(config: Config) extends Factory
given (config: Config) => Factory = MemoizingFactory(config)

// By-name given
trait Context
given context: () => Context = ???
```

Other changes to type classes involve the stabilisation of context bounds for type members.

> The next mechanism allows to definition of an abstract given instance that needs to be provided by the class implementing trait that defines abstract given.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This mechanism allows defining an abstract given instance that needs to be provided by a class implementing the trait that defines an abstract given.
```

```scala
trait Collection:
  // abstract member context-bound
  type Element: Order

class List[T: Order] extends Collection:
  type Element = T
  // given Order[Element] = ev$1 // generated by compiler, uses class context bound

class Set[T] extends Collection:
  type Element = T
  override given Order[Element] = ??? // custom implementation provided by the user
```

See the updated [Contextual Abstractions](https://scala-lang.org/api/3.6.0/docs/docs/reference/contextual/givens.html) chapter of the Scala 3 reference guide to learn more about these changes.

_**Note**: It is important not to confuse changes under SIP-64 with the [experimental modularity improvements](https://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/reference/experimental/typeclasses.html) available under `-language:experimental.modularity` and `-source:future`. These changes are still being developed in the experimental phase and would require SIP committee acceptance before stabilisation.

> ## SIP-56 Amendment: Match types extractors follow aliases and singletons

Reviewer 5: A link to this SIP would be appreciated

```

## Experimental SIP-57 - Replace non-sensical `@unchecked` annotations

One of the new, experimental, features is the implementation of [SIP-57](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/replace-nonsensical-unchecked-annotation.html) introducing a `runtimeChecked` extension method replacing some usages of `@unchecked` annotation using a more convenient syntax. A common use case for `runtimeChecked` is to assert that a pattern will always match, either for convenience or because there is a known invariant that the types can not express.

Some typical use cases might be looking up an expected entry in a dynamically loaded dictionary-like structure:

```scala
trait AppConfig:
  def get(key: String): Option[String]
val config: AppConfig = ???

val Some(appVersion) = config.get("appVersion").runtimeChecked
```

# Other notable changes

## Switch mapping of context bounds to using clauses

Until Scala 3.6.0 context bound parameters were always desugared to `implicit` arguments, starting with 3.6.0 these would be mapped to `using` parameters instead.
This change should not affect the majority of users, however, it can lead to differences in how implicits are resolved.

> Resolution of implicits can slightly differ depending on whether we're requesting them using `implicit` or `using` parameter, or depending on whether it was defined using `implicit` or `given` keywords. The special behaviours were introduced to a smooth migration from Scala 2 to brand new implicits resolution in Scala 3.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Resolution of implicits can slightly differ depending on whether we're requesting them using `implicit` or `using` parameter, or depending on whether they were defined using `implicit` or `given` keywords. The special behaviours were introduced to smoothen migration from Scala 2 to brand new implicits resolution in Scala 3.
```

This change might also affect some of the projects that use compiler plugins or macros to inspect the implicit argument lists of the function calls - these might require some minor fixes, eg. when filtering symbols by their flags.

<!-- TODO: Create and link docs describing differences between given/implicit -->

## Work on a better scheme for given prioritization

In the [Scala 3.5.0 release notes](https://scala-lang.org/blog/2024/08/22/scala-3.5.0-released.html) we've announced upcoming changes to givens, due to their peculiar problem with prioritization. Currently, the compiler always tries to select the instance with the most specific subtype of the requested type. In the future, it would change to always selecting the instance with the most general subtype that satisfies the context-bound.

Starting from Scala 3.6.0, code whose behaviour can differ between new and old rules (ambiguity on new, passing on old, or vice versa) will emit warnings, but the old rules will still be applied.

> Running the compiler with `-source:3.5` will allow you to temporarily keep using the old rules; with `-source:3.7` or `-source:future` you will get to use the new scheme.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Running the compiler with `-source:3.5` will allow you to temporarily keep using the old rules; with `-source:3.7` or `-source:future` the new scheme will be used.
```

> For the detailed motivation of changes with examples of code that will be easier to write and understand, see our recent blog post - Upcoming Changes to Givens in Scala 3.7.

Reviewer 5: Add the link to the blog post plz
